everybody, it's so nice to see you back at today's RStudio
community meetup. If we haven't had a chance to meet yet, and
this is your first meetup. I'm Rachel calling in from Boston
today. It's so nice to meet you. Feel free to introduce
yourselves through the chat window and say hello as well. I
love getting to see where people are calling in from all over the
world and to also see people sharing helpful resources with
each other there in the chat too. I host these meetups every
Tuesday at noon Eastern Time, and they are all recorded and
shared up to the RStudio YouTube. If you ever want to go
back and check out past sessions too. It will be the same exact
link that you joined the meetup from today, that same YouTube
link. If this is your first meetup, this is a friendly
meetup environment for teams to share different use cases with
each other and teach lessons learned. Together, we're all
dedicated to making this an inclusive and open environment
for everyone, no matter your experience, industry or
background. You can add the whole calendar of events or
individual events to your own calendar with a link that I'll
show on the screen here in just a few minutes. Oh, here we go.
I'll show it now. You can use this link to find out about any
upcoming events. For a heads up about next week, we will have
Julia Silgi and Isabel Zimmerman with us here next
Tuesday to talk about MLOps with with Vetiver in Python and R.
Today, I am so excited to have you all here for our sports
analytics meetup with the NFL Big Data Bowl 2022 winners, led
by Robin, Brendan, Riker and Elijah all here with me today.
I've seen a lot on Twitter and LinkedIn about their team and I'm
excited for us all to be able to ask them questions here today
as well. So during the event, you can ask questions on
YouTube, live where you're watching from, and are also able
to ask anonymous questions as well, through rstd.io slash
meetup questions, which I'll put on the screen here too. With
that, I would love to pull everybody up on stage. Let me do
this one by one here. Here we go. And Robin, Brendan, Riker,
Elijah, thank you so much for joining here today. Robin,
Brendan, Riker and Elijah are all graduate students in
statistics at Simon Fraser University in Vancouver, Canada.
They each have a passion for sports analytics and enjoy
applying their stats knowledge to the game. First off, I want
to say congratulations. And thank you so much for being here
to share your experience with us today. I will pull the slides
up here as well and turn it over to you all.
All right. Hi, everyone, and welcome to our presentation.
We're extremely excited to be able to share our work with you
all today. So today we'll be presenting on our 2022 NFL Big
Data Bowl Grand Champion winning project. We'll provide details
on the math behind the path and introduce some upgrades we've
made since the conclusion of the competition. So SFU has been a
sports analytics powerhouse for years. Professors such as Tim
Schwartz and Luke Bourne have attracted students who have a
passion for statistics and sports. Together they have
revolutionized the department and have helped students land
jobs with professional teams such as the Seattle Kraken, LA
Rams, Sacramento Kings, Vancouver Canucks, and many,
many more. SFU's Big Data Bowl success started in 2019, where a
team of students won the college competition, and were again
finalists in 2021. Their work really inspired us to continue
on the SFU tradition, and their mentorship helped us throughout
the entire process. So before we get into the project, let's meet
the team. So my name is Riker. I am a current Masters of
Statistics student at SFU. I formally interned with the
Vancouver Canucks of the NHL, and I'm currently an intern with
the Detroit Lions of the NFL.
Hi, everyone. My name is Robin. I'm a PhD candidate at Simon
Fraser University, and I'm focusing on revolutionizing the
game of curling with analytics and machine learning tools. In
addition to the Big Data Bowl, I was part of the winning team of
the Big Data Cup this year. So for that we use tracking data to
evaluate passing in women's Olympic hockey.
Hi, everyone. My name is Brendan. I'm currently a Masters
student at Simon Fraser University, and a data analyst
intern at Exelis Analytics. And I also won the Big Data Cup just
a year before Robin in the 2021 competition, where I worked with
a few others in building out a expected possession value model
for hockey, so evaluating every single event in a play.
And hi, my name is Elijah. I'm also a Masters of Statistics
student at SFU, and I'm currently an intern with the
Pittsburgh Pirates.
All right, for those of you who are unfamiliar, here's a quick
overview of last year's Big Data Bowl competition. So this was
the competition's fourth year, and the subject was chosen to be
on special teams. Special teams includes plays like punt returns,
kick returns, field goals, and extra points. We were provided
data from three NFL seasons, including next gen stats,
tracking data, PFF, advanced scouting data, and other basic
stats from the NFL. In total, there were $100,000 in prizes
awarded to three college and five open finalists. And then we
were lucky enough to be named the grand champions out of these
eight finalists.
So now for a bit of inspiration behind the project. This is an
entry into this year's 2022 Big Data Bowl by Zach Rogers, and
this gives good motivation for our work. It puts you in the
shoes of the punt returner. If you can imagine that you are the
punt returner, what should you look for after receiving the
punt? Our project aimed to answer a couple of these main
questions. So firstly, are returners making good decisions
to increase yards? Are they finding optimal gathering? Are
they finding optimal gaps, assessing tackle risk? And are
they using their teammates and following their blocks? Secondly,
we wanted to determine who was the best at evaluating their
decision. Could we rank returners, which could then
allow coaches to determine the best returners based on a given
situation? Now I'll toss it over to Robin and Brendan, and we'll
go over some more details of the project.
Cool, thank you. So now that we know what the punt returner
needs to consider, and what our goals are, we want to be able to
find show the best path to the end zone, like we see in green
on the figure here. The observed path is shown in black, the
returner and his team are shown in yellow and gray, while the
kick team players are shown in pink.
So the first step in building our optimal path is to find gaps
in the kick teams coverage. For this we use the Lonnie
triangulation. So this is a mesh like structure that connects the
points such that all players in the hall are all connected to
form triangles with no lines overlapping. This is shown with
the purple lines between any two kick team players. And to
account for the punt returner going around all the points,
we need to find gaps in the kick team's coverage. So for this,
with the punt returner going around all the players and
towards the sidelines, we add new gaps that connect the players
on the outside of the hall to the boundaries of the zone of
interest. So these are shown by the vertical and horizontal
purple lines here. Some of the interesting packages we use are
tri-mesh and neighbors from the tri-pack family.
And now that we have these windows to find that the punt
returner can move through on his way towards the end zone, we
want to move towards quantifying the pressure along
each of these windows. And we do this using our penalized
expected arrival time algorithm. To give a bit of visual
intuition behind this algorithm, if you look at that heat line
in the top left of the plot here, you can see that towards
the sideline, it's colored green, indicating that there's
a lot of open space there. And it's going to take the members
of the kicking team a long time to get to that position. While
as you move closer and closer to where all the players are, you
that it goes from green to yellow to red, indicating that
there's more pressure and less time for the punt returner to
move through that area. And to kind of formalize this a little
bit more, the goal of this algorithm is to obtain the
minimum time we expect it to take a member of the kicking
team in red here to reach a target location as indicated by
the X here. And we're going to take a bunch of different target
locations. But let's just focus on this single spot right here.
So with that target location, we're going to look at every
kicking team player on the field or every player in red, that's
trying to stop the punt returner from moving forward. And let's
say we just look at number 97, for example, to start off here.
So with number 97, what we're going to do is we're going to
create a straight line connecting him to that target
location. And once we do that, we're going to find all blockers
that we can project onto this straight line at a 90 degree
angle. And that's going to sort of be all of the blockers that
can really reasonably impede his path from getting to that target
location. So here we have number 82 and number 19. And for these
blockers, we're going to take two different measurements. So
first, we're going to take the length of that projection from
82 to the straight line, as indicated by D1 here. And that's
going to be a measure of the lateral distance from the kicking
team player. And then we're going to take the distance from
number 97 to that projection. And that's going to be
indicated by D2 here. And that's sort of the forward distance
from the kicking team player to the blocker. And with these two
measurements, we're going to attribute time penalties for
each of the blockers using what we call a projected Gaussian
kernel. And that's characterized by the equation right here and
the heat map below. And sort of what we're trying to do here is
to create an equation where we're kind of accurately
capturing how much a blocker is likely to impede a member of the
kicking team's path to that target location. Right, so you
can see here that when you're very close and right in front of
number 97, you're going to impose a very high penalty.
Whereas as we move further and further out, you can be a bit
more lateral from the kicking team player or from number 97.
But you you have less of a penalty overall, right? Because
if you're say you're right in front of number 97, like one foot
forward from him, but five feet to the left, then you're less
likely to actually catch him or impede him than if you're, say,
10 feet forward from him and five feet to the left. And once
we assign these blocker penalties, we're going to simply
add them all up. So with number 19, and number 82, they impose
a 0.54 and 0.31 second penalty on number 97, respectively,
giving us a total penalty of 0.85 seconds by these two
blockers. Then we're going to calculate the expected time to
the target location for number 97, given that he runs at a
straight line speed of seven yards per second, and that's
going to be 2.34 seconds. Then we add these two values up. So
the time that we expect him to take to get to that target
location unimpeded as 2.34, and the blocker penalty that we
expect to happen as 0.85. And that's going to give us 3.19
seconds for number 97 to that target. And we're going to
repeat this process over and over for every member of the
kicking team. And on the left here, you can see we have a
little table with the top few players here. And number 17 is
the quickest to get to that target location at 0.92 seconds
in this in this case. And that's sort of that's going to
be our measure of the time we expect a member of the kicking
team to get to that location, or our penalized expected arrival
time. And we're going to repeat this process over and over for
up to 20 evenly spaced points along each of these windows. So
on that, so that's where we get that sort of heat line map on
the left here, where you can see where we're basically just
taking a bunch of different targets, and we're smoothing
them out to get a nice, these nice kind of color transitions
over each of the windows. And now I'll pass it back over to
Robin to talk about how we go from this penalized expected
arrival time measure to actually finding the optimal path through
the menus.
Great, so now that we have our mesh structure and a waiting
system for it, we need to find a way to get the punt returner to
the end zone. And to do this, we use the A star search algorithm.
So it works a little bit like a GPS and just finds the safest
route while avoiding traffic. Our algorithm looks at a
heuristic function, which defines how many yards are
remaining from the target to the end zone, and a cost function.
This cost function describes the distance between the punt
returner and the target, the danger associated with the
target point, as well as how risky of a target the punt
returner may be willing to consider traveling to. The
algorithm looks at various possible routes and restarts
whenever the total of the heuristic and cost function
become too large. We can set a few constants to help us with
the trade off between risk and reward for the punt returner.
So today, we're going to really focus on the alpha term and see
how changing it might adjust this trade off between risk and
reward. So for our submission, if you have the chance to look
at it, we used alpha of 0.5. So we consider this to be a good
mixture of risk and reward for a punt returner wanting to gain
yards while still avoiding the tackle, avoiding injury, stuff
like that. If we were to change alpha to be one, the path
considers only yards remaining to the end zone with no care of
the danger of being tackled. So this would mean that you're
going basically straight to the end zone and hopefully that you
can push everyone out of the way. And then setting alpha to
zero finds the safest path available without considering if
it's really going to bring you closer to the end zone. So this
typically will send you along the sidelines and push you the
rest of the way.
And now that we have this optimal path defined, let's just
take a look at a case here where we set alpha equal to 0.5. And
we want to compare the optimal path versus our the actual
observed path for the punt returner. And to do that, we
look over the next five yards for each of the path. So as you
can see on the top right here in the visual, we have sort of the
highlighted black and green line over the next five yards. And we
want to calculate the crochet distance over this time. And
crochet distance is a measure of difference between two paths
where essentially intuitively you could think of it as one
path being a man, the other path being a dog. And the
crochet distance is the minimum length of a leash you need to
traverse from one end of the paths to the other end. And you
can see visually a bit of visual intuition behind this. With the
blue lines here, you can see that sort of like steps along
each of these paths. And the teal line there is another step,
but it's just the step where the length is maximized. And that's
sort of the minimum length of a leash that you would need to
traverse from both ends. And with this crochet distance, we
also have to take into account a couple of other things. Just in
case there are cases where there's less than five yards
remaining in either the observed or the optimal path. So if there
aren't, so if both paths are more than five yards, then we
just simply calculate the crochet distance. And that's
sort of our measure of deviation from the optimal path in that
moment. But if either of the paths are between one and five
yards, then we're going to multiply the crochet distance
by five and divide it by the minimum of those two, the
minimum length of those two paths to sort of scale up and
account for the fact that that path, we aren't really seeing a
full five yard movement. So we're trying to kind of
counteract that. And if there's less than one yard on either of
the paths, then we omit the calculation since we don't
really have enough information to see how the punt return was
moving relative to the optimal path. And yeah, with with this
optimal path algorithm, we also just wanted to give a quick
shout out to some of the key R functions that really helped us
in this process. So first up nest and map are super helpful
for making this whole process very tidy and clean and, and
being able to apply large scale analysis using very complex
operations within just a single data frame. So nest essentially
allows you to group say you want to group the data by moment or
by each frame of the play where a frame is simply just a moment
in time. But you have 20 rows of player locations. If you group
by the play or by the frame, then you can sort of nest the
data into a column of data frames, which includes all of
the player locations. So you have one row per frame. But
within that row, you have sort of a data frame of all of the
player locations. Then with the map function, you can start
applying different functions to that data. So you can apply
basically functions to find the windows for the punt return to
move through or calculate the penalized expected arrival time
or find the optimal path with the A star algorithm using this
map function all within one data frame. And future map is just
an evolution beyond that where you can parallelize the code. So
it runs a bit quicker. And dplyr, of course, was super
helpful for us just with building out sort of a tiny
verse pipeline with key functions like mutate, select and
filters, and also the pipe operator making the code nice
and sleek. Then of course, our all of our plots here are made
with ggplot and gganimate. And it's those packages are just
super awesome for making very nice, aesthetically pleasing
plots with very little effort.
For a second, for questions, if there are any kind of the key
content of what our submission optimal path was.
Yeah, I can see a question that came over from Slido. And just
a reminder, a reminder that you can ask questions over on Slido
and I'll just put up the link right now on the screen. So you
can ask questions there anonymously. Or you can ask
through YouTube Live too. But one of the questions that came
up was, I'll put on the screen, do you think being in a general
statistics graduate program was beneficial to your work as
opposed to more specific like data science or sports
analytics?
That's a good question. There might be debates there. I think
like, so we'll talk a little bit later. But for our work, a key
aspect in building a team is definitely to have a good
variety of backgrounds. So having someone who is like a
statistics graduate, to really understand like the models and
what's going on behind it is great. If you could get like a
computer scientist on there. They're super, super good at
they're super efficient and can write code probably a lot
faster than a lot of us stats folk. Yeah, but it's definitely
good to have always someone on your team with a stats
background to understand what's going on. But a mixture of
various backgrounds and departments and origin stories
is always, always great to see.
That's great. Thank you. One other question I see over on
Slido, I'll put on the screen here is, did you calculate P or
PAT at just a single point in time at catch or at multiple
points during the return?
Yeah, that's a great question. So yeah, we recalculated the P
basically at every single frame of the play. And then for our
big data ball submission, we were sort of taking the median
over the entire play, just because there are a few frames
where say a punt returner is running in a path that's maybe
not the optimal path by our algorithm, but also a very good
option. Then after a few frames, the optimal path should adjust
to that. But during that time when they are running in the
optimal path, telling them to go a different way, it is it has
quite a big crochet deviation. So the median, or we took the
median to sort of account for that, and adjust for the fact
sort of for our naivety in that there could be two different,
very great, great options. So that's what we were doing for
the big data ball. But we've also played around with metrics
for looking at it, just write a catch, taking the mean, looking
at, say, the frame where there's the first forward movement, and
just different metrics like that. But yeah, basically, we
can calculate it over every frame.
And we'll maybe cut in and add a little bit of questions about
Pete and you're asking, answering for shade deviation.
Oh, yeah, shady deviation, we do the median. Pete is just like
calculated all the time all over the place.
Can you remind me what?
Yeah, so the P is basically like, I'll go back to that heat
map that we had are the little heat lines here. So this is the
penalized expected arrival time along each of the windows here.
Sorry, it's a little bit early in the morning in Pacific right
now. But yeah, here's some along each of the windows. This is the
P here. So it's sort of like the measure of how long it will take
the puppets or how long it will take the kicking team to get to
that location, like any of these locations, whereas the first
shade deviation is sort of, it's how much the puppeteer is
deviating from the optimal path. So yeah, we calculate everything
in every single frame.
Thank you. I see a few other just comments to say extremely
impressive word, but we'll hold some of the other questions
until the next stopping point. That works for you.
For sure.
OK, so.
All right, let me fix. Let me fix our screen here.
There we go.
OK, so to make our work a little bit more interactive, we built
a shiny app so that everyone here today can have a look at
our optimal path, not any return that you might want to see
throughout all the years of the data that we have. So as the
user, you can select the season, the returner, the play, and set
the risk alpha that you want the punt returner to consider when
making his optimal path, I guess. So you can look at the
return at any point along the way by hitting the play button
in the top right corner. Or you can use the slider bar to look
at any specific point along the return. So you're given a
description of what the return looks like, or what the return
actually achieved. And then you have the option to save it as
the image of the individual frame that you're looking at.
You can save the GIF of the entire return, or the data
that's behind the return if you want to look at it and play with
it yourself. So maybe we'll look at the McCall Hardman or we can
go live. So let's let's go live and have a bit. Sorry, that's
fine. Cool. So Brendan will reload our app. So maybe don't
try to log on right away, because we want to make sure
we're efficient for you guys. So we can start off by picking a
year, let's pick 2020, maybe. And then if anyone in the
comments, do you have like a favorite punt returner that you
might want to see from the 2020 season? Feel free to comment
now. Give it a second. Come on, I know somebody wants to put
someone in there. You can do it anonymously too. Don't see
anyone. All right. Eli, do you have a favorite?
I hear General Olszewski is good, if I didn't butcher his
name.
Sure, we can go for General Olszewski. Oh, here's one. Is
Mackenzie. Okay, is there a specific game that you like for
this returner? So there's only one. We can go with that. Okay.
Brendan, you want to read their description?
Yeah, for sure. Yeah. So on this punt return, it looks like
Hoff took a 55-yard punt return to or he made a 55-yard punt to
Isaiah Mackenzie, who ran 84 yards for a touchdown. So I
guess we have a good player.
Wait, wait, wait. Don't don't worry. Okay, so now like,
consider that type of a play, you have a big punt return.
What quarter are we in? We're kind of small here. So we're in
the second quarter, five, almost six minutes in. So where do we
think we should put our alpha? Should we be considered risky?
I guess if you went 84 yards, it's probably something a little
risky. So what do we like, maybe 0.7? We can
0.7 or 0.8. Let's do 0.7 or 0.8.
Okay, so we can generate it and then it takes a little bit of
time because there's a whole lot of math going on as you saw us
go through before. So it's working on the Acer search
algorithm. There's a loading bar so you know that you at least
hit the button and you don't have to click it a bunch of
times. And then we'll see the entire image of the return come
up. And then in the top right, it'll have the slider bar. So
it'll update and tell you how long of the return actually
lasted. You can play through it where it'll just kind of do like
a little slideshow of of each frame of the play. Hopefully
screen sharing isn't stealing all of Brendan's computer juice.
Yeah, I guess yeah, it's a longer return. So it's going to
take a while to generate longer ones. The shorter ones are pretty
fast. So any other questions, Rachel, to fill our our next
five seconds?
One question that I had was, like thinking about people
getting started with the Big Data Bowl for 2023. And you just
have all this data. How do you narrow down what you want to
focus on?
Yeah, so typically, so we're not sure what they're going to
announce this year for the Big Data Bowl. But I think they're
leaning towards having a top a general topic each year. So for
us, it was punt returns. So this year, who knows what it might be?
But yeah, just like, definitely start by just like, looking at
the data, seeing what you can find. And playing around, make
And playing around, make some histograms, make some pie charts,
anything you can do just to understand the data, it's going
to be a lot of data and a really hard to run. So often just like,
looking at a couple plays or one good play, make sure everything
works for that play before you scale it up to big, because some
of our stuff, it would run, I think Riker was running stuff
like overnight. And then if we had to, like, find one error,
you'd you'd fix it. And then you'd go and run everything
again, overnight. So it's, you don't want to start there, you
want to start small, maybe with one good play and see what you
can do.
Yeah, and definitely, definitely, you know, we had
kind of a broad topic with special teams, there was a lot
of different ways we could go with it. But figuring out what
what's going to be useful as well in a football sense. And
then, like Robin said, kind of getting a general idea how the
data looks, what's going to be possible, and then kind of
running with it from there.
Yeah, we definitely had a lot of other ideas, like are we going
to do, you know, field goals, are we going to do this and that
and then it's just kind of trial and error and getting close to
what you think is the best idea.
Yeah. Okay, so our return is loaded. Brendan, maybe you want
to play around with it. And yes, you can grab the slider bar,
look, look at the whole frame or hit play and hopefully it loads
somewhat smoothly. It tends to blink a little bit. So right now
it's just at like point, I think it updates at point one second,
so it'll take a little while to get through this gigantic
return. But you can see the optimal path will update it
every single frame, all the calculations are redone every
frame. So it's a lot of data that you're really seeing right
now. Working with tracking data is definitely a great
experience. Like even if you're not ready to enter the big data
and maybe you don't have your star lineup ready, play around
with the data, like get used to working with tracking data is
definitely something if you want to start a career in in sports
analytics, just getting those tools in your toolkit is is
definitely super useful. And then once the punt returner
passes the final kick team player, all calculations kind of
stop and we're just like, we just put a straight arrow is
like book it to the end zone. But obviously, he's still kind
of has to run away and avoid anyone who's super fast. Yeah.
It might be frozen now.
Well, that's all there is.
There are questions that came through when we asked earlier
to and and someone had asked, could you see potential for this
being used real time somewhere down the line with increased
processing power?
Um, so one article I did see come out in the summer, I think
it was it was like the ultimate big data bowl recap. And for our
year, it talked about creating the the ultimate submission
would be like a combination of Zack Rogers, like, put you in
the punt returner, like video game. And then you could see our
optimal path, like, projected to the end of the year. And then
projected through all the players that you might be
running towards, so that you could actually learn from it in
a video game sense would be like, amazing. So maybe if they
could get it to that level, and make like a video game for punt
returners to learn, as they're off the field, would would be a
wild for me. So one day, maybe.
That's awesome. I just
definitely sorry.
Sorry to cut you off, Rachel, I was gonna say as well, like kind
of a, a post game or a post game analysis of how you did as a
returner. So if the processing power is unfortunately not
there, for an in game thing, I think like a post game analysis
of, of kind of your performance or performances for partners
across the league is I would be a great use for this.
That's great. One last question, too, that I saw come in a little
bit earlier, is someone asked, is it possible to share code for
future reference?
For us, all of our code is on GitHub.
We can share that link at the that the it's on their end slide.
So we can, you can look at that thereafter.
Cool. Thank you.
Yeah. So Richard, you can share the shiny app link in the chat,
if you want for everyone to play around with.
So a little bit more, we'll go into this McCole Hardman return
on the next slide. So here, we're going to show McCole
Hardman's week 12 return against Tampa Bay, where we have an
alpha of zero, so be as safe as possible 0.5, kind of a good
mix of risk and reward, and one, which basically just says run
straight to the end zone, plow through everyone if you need to.
So in our Big Data Bowl finals presentation, we concluded that
McCole Hardman was a fairly conservative player. And we can
use our app to further analyze just how conservative he is. So
if you want to play the GIFs, so the optimal path updates at
each frame, constantly updating and adapting to the situation
that McCole Hardman is facing, suggesting a new optimal path
given each situation. And overall, McCole Hardman, we
think could use this tool to improve his return, because a
lot of his return is probably closest to a risk level of zero,
which, you know, we kind of want to gain yards as as we do a
return. But it depends on the scenario, right? He's a valuable
player in his other, other role on the team. So it's, you kind
of want to keep them safe at the same time. So things like that
could influence how you might determine what alpha you might
want to use.
Yeah, okay, so I'm going to take over now and talk about kind of
what we ended up doing after the initial submission. Go to the
next slide. Yeah, so the task that the NFL gave us was to look
at a look at a specific team, and try to find out how we can
use the work we did to improve, you know, their results in the
coming seasons. So we picked Kansas City. So as you can see,
like in 2018, they are really highly ranked in terms of, you
know, average punt return yardage. And that kind of fell
off in 2019 and 2020, which coincided with Tyreek Hill, the
returner being changed to McCole Hardman, who Robert just showed.
And so after watching some of McCole Hardman's punts, we kind
of, we kind of chose a Chiefs as someone that we thought we
could improve. And we can see why in this plot. So if you
look at the McCole Hardman plot on the far right, he often kind
of just goes towards the sidelines, he's not cutting up
and, you know, running up the middle of the field where
there's obviously gonna be more defenders, we also have more
blockers, and there might be more space to maneuver. And we
can kind of contrast him with the other three punt returners
on the right who rank really highly in our expected return
yardage metric, or just on average punt return yardage,
they're, they're much stronger returners, you can see that by
the really long returns for some of them. And so the way we
quantify that is by looking at, you know, their average yards
gain per punt return versus their frechet path deviation. So
the frechet path deviation is kind of a concept of good
decision making. So being close to the optimal path versus, you
know, average yardage gain per play is more of a just skill
metric of, you know, it's dependent on how fast you are.
And obviously the strength of your blockers, and the strength
of the, of the kicking team. So we can look at McCole Hardman,
he's kind of on the bottom right of that plot, which means he
doesn't have a lot of skill, and he's not making great decisions.
And that's, you know, contrasting to the other three
highlighted names who were the same, who are the returners we
saw on the last slide, who are very strong returners. So the
idea is, you know, if you decrease your frechet path
deviation, you know, that might lead you to gaining more yards
than the average punt return. And so here are examples of two
different plays, where we'd see, you know, when the, in the plot
on the left with the green plot, when Hardman follows the optimal
path or gets closer to it, he gets closer to what we might
expect him to get in terms of expected yards, versus on the
right and on the plot on the red, he doesn't, you know, get
really close to what we might have, what we might expect using
our expected punt return yardage metric. And that's because, you
know, he's, his frechet path deviation is very, very large.
I'll say maybe we should skip those questions for the end and
just power through for time.
Sounds good.
All right, and then just talking about more generally, you know,
how to have a good submission for the Big Data Bowl, I think
one of the biggest parts is, like Robin mentioned earlier,
information, having a very diverse team with, you know,
many different skill sets, you know, I come from more of like,
a math physics background, very different from the background
that maybe Robin has, you know, doing an undergrad in stats. And
so that helped us, we kind of brought different ideas to the
table. And then, you know, brainstorming, you know, as
Robin mentioned earlier, making visualization, so you know,
exploratory data analysis, seeing what kind of data you
have, what kind of paths might you go through, in terms of
different projects, you know, just running with something and
then not being afraid of scrapping it and going in a
different direction, if you see a better direction, you know, as
you're working, doing research, looking at different sports is
something that I think is one of the biggest things we, in the
next slide, we'll show one of the concepts that we were kind
of taking from a different sports soccer. So using other
sports, using other researchers, there can be a great tool
towards building a really nice project. And looking at previous
Big Data Bowl projects is obviously, you know, there's
some great work there as well. And then, you know, trial and
error and just being willing to adapt and change your project
and, you know, work hard and have fun. So here is kind of
what I mentioned. So originally, the kind of first idea we
started with what these like stochastic convex hulls, which
we kind of took as an idea from soccer. So we're kind of looking
at, you know, an area enclosed in a certain amount of yards by
the defenders and the return team to kind of get an
understanding for like, kind of field control, like what the
kicking team and the returning team might have in terms of field
control and how that might, we could use as a feature to like,
you know, create like an expected yards metric. And then,
you know, as we develop that idea, we move forward, we
started, you know, developing the ASTAR search algorithm,
started developing the PEAT. So that all kind of came out from
this initial idea of the convex hulls.
All right. So for any of you who are interested in the 2023, or
beyond those Big Data Bowls, this is what we kind of believe
makes a good submission. So firstly, we think do a few
things great, rather than several things good. The goal is
really to stand out to the judges. And we think this is
kind of how you do that. Second, have multiple ways to digest
ideas. So this could be through visuals, text, equations, titles,
or even captions. The third is to be really clear and concise
with your project. So have a goal in mind, what problem are
you trying to solve? Then determine the method, how are
you going to solve this problem, and then apply it, it's
really important for your project to be useful to the NFL,
and for you to explain how it could be useful. Lastly, have
fun and learn as much as you can, not only from your own
project, but many all of the many great submissions every
year. All right, so that's really everything we have for
you guys today. On the left there, we have QR codes that
take you to our original submission, the GitHub page,
like we mentioned earlier, as well as the shiny app that we
we showed you guys. We really appreciate the opportunity to
talk to you about our work. And really want to thank everyone
for coming out today. And obviously, thank you, Rachel,
for having us. We'd be happy to answer any more questions that
you guys may have.
Thank you all so much. This is awesome. Really impressive.
Actually, it's like being able to see it through all the
animations to in the presentation was great. I'm
gonna go check over to Slido and see what questions we have. But
just want to remind everybody, if you're watching now on
YouTube, you don't have to use Slido, you can just comment in
YouTube. But you can ask questions anonymously on Slido
too. And let me just pull it up on the screen right here. We'll
give people a few minutes to ask some other questions. I see
Christopher and Brian saying amazing work, fantastic stuff in
the chats on YouTube. I really liked the way that you included
like tips for people who are wanting to get started. And was
just thinking, like, on the last tip that you said focus on like
a few, like great things, instead of like trying to do
everything. Were there a few things that you had to narrow
down to get to where you got to the project now?
Yeah, I think we I think we had like kind of Eli went over when
we, you know, we kind of built it up from the ground up, and
had these like convex hulls and then developed it more into like
the optimal path. And then once we got the idea for the optimal
path, and Brendan and Robin kind of took the lead on that side,
that became a real focal point for us. So we did have a lot of
those other like original ideas, we use those as features in our
returners of expected model. But they weren't as featured in the
project, we really tried to hone in on the optimal path and make
that the focal point.
And definitely while you're working on your submission, I
think for us, it was you're allowed up to 2000 words, which
doesn't go a long way. So like definitely having visuals that
kind of explain what's going on to can save you a lot of time in
space. So you don't like if you do too many small things, you
won't be able to explain it near the extent it would deserve. So
it's nice to be able to do this where it's like we can actually
show people all the hidden elements that they didn't get to
see and, and would never really know if we didn't go through
this.
I just remembered I wanted to show this link to the Kaggle
documentation you had shared with me too. I just made a short
link to make it easier for people to access it. But one
other question that just came through on Slido was, what were
the biggest challenges when going through the data?
First of all, the the size of it, how much was there really
trying to really trying to utilize like every piece that
they provided for us like trying to really diversify how we were
building out the project. But like I got mentioned a few times
throughout the presentation, the amount of the amount of
tracking data is really the challenging, really the
challenging part. And then being able to turn that into our own,
our own metrics was was also a challenge.
Yeah, I can't remember if it was the NFL or somewhere else. But I
think they're, they have the ability to go like, another 10
times of a finer grain of tracking data. But they're just
like, please don't we do not have the capacity to like, to be
able to even use that like it's too fine. So there are like,
hopefully they don't go too crazy. But it's a it's an
interesting area to work with is the tracking data.
And with that, too, I just like to say the NFL tracking data was
probably the nicest data I've worked with and how clean it was
and just easy to work with. Like there weren't really any errors.
There might have been like one time I might have saw a player
where two players have the same number. Jersey number, but that's
that's about it. Like it was pretty smooth. There were no
discontinuities in the tracking data at all, really. So it just
made it so much easier to work with. Yeah, like Riker was
mentioning size was the biggest issue just with dealing with all
of this, these millions of rows of data. But actually, having to
clean up the data was super easy.
No, I definitely having like a team to work with can alleviate
a lot of the challenges because we like the way our project was
we approached our project was we split it up. And if you have a
strong computer, you're doing the data cleaning. And if you
have a weak computer, you're going to do the research and we
kind of like split up the different tasks that we had to
face that we could always have everyone doing something and
progressing the project.
That's great. Um, Elijah, I think you were gonna say
something. I want to jump to the next question.
No, I was gonna actually just mention a Brendan like and Robin,
they've both done more like project with hockey tracking
data. And you know, you have players kind of coming into the
frame then at leaving the frame and they kind of just appear and
disappear sometimes that a magic versus Yeah, like with the NFL,
big data data like that, you know, the data is really, really
You know, we've really made it when you have people spamming
your meetup as well. So congrats.
Um, but let's, let's see what other other questions. Oh, one
question I did want to ask is, um, how do you get started
working with player tracking data? Were there resources that
you turn to?
I think a lot of us had a bit of experience prior to whether it
be in school or through internships or other just other
projects. I know, like, was mentioned, you know, Brendan, I
worked with big, the big data cup the year before. Yeah, like
I'm, I, I'm sure these are all like, you know, like, you know,
like, you know, like, you know, like, you know, like, you know,
yeah, like, I'm, I, I'm sure these guys have had some
resources. But for, for me, it was just kind of like, diving
right into it and figuring out as you go.
Yeah, I think for me, I'd only worked with event level data
before going into this competition. And just like the
key thing that I really focused on and needed was like, I need
the visual. I like I won't understand that it's working,
you can give me something, a bunch of numbers. But like, if I
can have a visual to go with it, that like definitely helps with
the understanding of what's going on, like a million times.
Yeah, yeah, I'd say, yeah, like along those lines, having good
knowledge of tidyverse and using those nest and not functions and
gg animate made it so much easier to understand the data
because if you can kind of put it into this nice clean pipeline
where you can break it down into like one row per frame or
per player, whatever you need, then you can just visualize it
with gg animate, it makes it so much easier to see what's
actually going on, rather than just looking at the data and
seeing like x coordinate 34, y coordinate 43 or something. So
that just made it way, way easier to kind of get going and
see where issues were happening if they were happening.
Cool. So get started with gg animate. Is that what you
Yeah, yeah.
Let me just jump over. There's a few other questions on Slido.
Let me copy them over to the screen here.
This one is in terms of all your data images, how do you
all your data inputs? Do you see this extending to performance
data like expected speed, fatigue, etc, perhaps from
practice?
Yeah, yeah, I think one thing that we talked about quite a bit
is sort of like a lot of comments that we got were around
just with our optimal path algorithm, really what we're
trying to optimize is just gaining yards. But there's a lot
else going on in the play, like, a player could get hit and
fumble the ball get injured. So there's, like, I guess, that's
one thing that our algorithm doesn't really take into
account. In terms of, like expected speed, we're also
working on right now incorporating player speeds into
our optimal path algorithm too. So with that, like you can maybe
look at say, Nicole Hartman, a lot of the times he was running
to the sideline, but he is pretty fast. So incorporating
that into the data might, might make the optimal path shift a
bit more towards what he was doing, in certain cases. So
that's one thing where I think the model can be improved. And I
think, yeah, we're pretty close to having that now we're
actually hoping to present that in about a week and a half from
now at another conference. But yeah, like that's, that's
something that we were kind of looking at in a comment that we
got quite a bit.
Awesome. Thank you. I'm curious, do you all normally win your
like fantasy football leagues?
We're all in one together that just finished its first weekend.
It was a bit rough for some of us.
One other slide on your model.
For the answer, yes, we usually win.
Okay.
One of the other question was, at any point during the project,
did you feel like you hit a roadblock?
Yeah, well, I mean, like with our projects, really, for when
we started in September, we didn't really work on it super,
super hard until December when our courses ended. Like, because
we had a couple of like, very difficult courses to go through
that were sucking up a lot of our time. So for once we got
through that, there were a couple days where I was thinking
like, man, are we going to get it done in time? And there were
a few things like trying to find out, say the penalized expected
arrival time algorithm, trying to find ways to actually do
that. It took a little while to really think through it, and
come up with an algorithm to actually do that. Yeah, that I
guess that's the one roadblock that came to mind that and just
school kind of getting in the way. But yeah, I think I don't
know if you guys have anything to add there.
Yeah, I remember. I think it was I think it was due on like the
7th of January or something. And I remember January 4, we
realized that we had calculated something completely wrong. So
the overnight running the code overnight that Robin talked
about, he had to redo three days before it was before it was due.
So that was a little bit stressful, but happy we happy we
turned it around and made it work.
That's great. So I know you've mentioned like forming your team
with like diverse backgrounds is really important. I'm
wondering for people who maybe are working in like different
industries right now, but are also super interested in sports
and big data bowl. If you have any suggestions for like meeting
people that could possibly be part of their team?
I'll maybe Yeah, so for the big data bowl, I think we typically
stay SFU. But like stuff for the big data cup. Like, maybe
Brendan, you can talk about how you formed your big data cup
Yeah, yeah. So yeah, like Robin was mentioning for this one, I
just emailed all the students who are interested in sports and
we formed a team. But for the big data cup, I just met my
teammates online, like on Twitter. So I think Twitter is a
great resource for sports analytics, because there's so
many people on there just sharing their ideas through
blogs or through videos and just various forms of media. So I
think that's a great resource. And I think that's a great
So I think that's a great way to kind of get involved and like
interact with other people who are in the industry and trying
to get into the industry. And yeah, I literally just met one
of my teammates online through Twitter. And then we said, how
are we going to get other people then we emailed one guy that he
knew, and then that was three, then we thought, oh, man, we
need maybe someone with a bit more of like a strong statistical
background, because at the time, I was just finishing my
undergrad, and the other two guys were more of like hockey
oriented guys. So then we just reached out to a guy who went to
the same university as my other teammate. And he happened to be
in he was a PhD at McGill. And then now he's working with him
directly in my internship. So yeah, that's that's sort of like
like he was a big help to that. And without him, we probably
wouldn't have gotten that done. So yeah, like, it just ended up
just snowballing from just being on Twitter and meeting one guy
then meeting other people from that, then not turn into the big
data cup and then internships from there.
Yeah, definitely. If you want to get started, I'd recommend like
getting on Twitter and play around with any kind of data that
you can get your hands on. And just share it like the community
is huge for sports analytics on Twitter. And we'll shout out
Sports Dataverse, which I know you've had on here before, like
follow them on Twitter. There's so many people in that community
who would help lift each other up and support any project or
questions that you might have.
That's great. I know Sam from Sports Dataverse was on a bit
earlier, he might be on now too, if you want to share the link
to Twitter as well.
I know you also mentioned like, a great idea is to look at other
sports to get ideas and to do brainstorming. What did you look
at? Or what other sports data were you working with?
Probably the most publicly available with some tracking
data. So like tracking data is very hidden, and not a lot of
people share it. So it's like amazing that the NFL is doing
this. So all the other big data bulls will have some tracking
data, a lot of them. And then soccer is a huge one that has
tracking data, and like properly published papers using
it explaining all the stuff that works. I think soccer is one of
the biggest ones to look at. And then the Big Data Cup recently
this year started using tracking data. So all those papers and
that data is publicly available, supported by staff leads who
made the data from broadcast video. So just get your hands on
stuff and do what you can.
Great, thank you. I think there's one more question that I
realized I missed from earlier. And it was, sounds like you're
running the code locally. Were there any specific roadblocks to
offloading that to the cloud? Or was that just not really
necessary?
So yeah, like, all the code ended up going on my computer,
for the most part, like other than Uline records. So they, I
think they managed to get it done. But I think I helped them
run a bit of code. But like, we, like, my computer was just
strong enough to do what we needed. And it was an overnight
process. So I had to just let it run overnight. But the optimal
path algorithm and everything, it wasn't too computationally
exhaustive, where we had to go to the cloud or anything like
that. Yeah, the only issue, I guess, was just time wise with
running all of it. But we basically just stuck to one play
at a time when we were testing things out. So that I don't
think that was really too much of a problem for us. And yeah,
we didn't really have to go to the cloud for anything.
Yeah, we were probably on the borderline of like, should we
switch to the cloud and put in all that effort? Or should we
just send it to Brendan? And hopefully it'll run in time. So
we probably could have gone either way.
Although there's also like, you know, big costs going to the
cloud, especially when you have like, over three gigs of data.
We didn't know we were going to win.
Yeah, and then once the data was cleaned up, like Brendan
mentioned, we were able to just run like one play at a time,
which wasn't too computationally heavy. But once we
got the data cleaned for the model, then like we had really
cut down on the size of it. And then that was after that, we
were kind of good to go.
Well, and that Shiny app, that's just on, is that just on
Shiny apps IO today? Yeah. Yeah. Awesome. Sounds like a great
Shiny submission for the Shiny contest.
Yeah, maybe we'll have to add some updates and see what we can
do.
Well, thank you all so much for for joining us all here today
and answering all our questions. Really appreciate you sharing
your experience with us.
Thanks for having us. Yeah, thank you. Congratulations. And
thank you all so much for joining to just a reminder. If
you ever have suggestions or want to present at a future
meetup, I'll share those links where you can upload suggestions
or meetup topics in the recording. And the recording
will be the same exact YouTube link that you accessed it at
today. But thank you all again so much for joining. Have a
great rest of the day, everybody.